I, Toufique Ahmed, am working as a Lecturer in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) at Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET). Bangladesh is a developing country situated in the south Asia. It is a very densely populated country with very limited area and resources. I consider myself fortunate as I have seen the emergence of  the country  from an underdeveloped  to a middle-income one. This development has come with the help of the workforce of  large human resource and technological advancement of this country. There are many software companies in our country and they have contributed a lot to the economy of the nation. However, standard software practices are not followed in our industry and it can contribute to our economy more with increased productivity by following standard software practices and using automatic tools. State-of-the-art research needs to be carried out to understand the demand of our industry and developed affordable practices and tools for companies with diverse economic strength.  Therefore, being motivated to contribute in the development of my nation,  I felt the urge to be involved in software engineering research.   


My parents have played the most important role in my education. They tried their level best to give me the best education possible within their limits. My family has prepared me to face any challenges both in my personal and academic life. They always inspired me to work hard with my education. The most important lesson of my life has been to work for the other people surround me. This lesson has greatly influenced me as a person and I always follow the lessons given by my parents. I always try to work harder and surpass the person I was the day before.


I was given the best possible education by my parents. They have sent me to Notre Dame College, Dhaka to attend my high school. There I met a group of people with diversified ideas, culture and religions. However, the most important thing I have learned from this college is how to work together to serve the underprivileged communities of the country. The college is run by the Christian missionaries and they used to run several programs for the underprivileged people to help them to improve the standard of their life. They used to inspire the students to participate in the programs like providing night schooling to the street children, providing relief works during natural calamities, etc. I have realized my duty of serving distressed people to help them improve their lives by taking part in these programs.   


After completion of my high school studies, I got admitted in Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), the top ranked engineering university and research school of the country. My journey in BUET is quite extraordinary and I am indebted to this institution for its contribution to build me as a prolific student. I secured 1st position in my batch. As a reward of my academic excellence, I got appointed as a Lecturer of the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at BUET. After my appointment, I tried my utmost to impart knowledge among the students and thus performing my duty towards my students and society. However, I realised that a Ph.D. will help me to build as a prolific academician and increase the depth of my knowledge. Therefore, I felt the necessity of  attending a Ph.D. program in order to serve the academia in a more effective way.


At the current stage of my life, I strongly feel a Ph.D. will enable me to contribute more towards academia and industry. I firmly believe that I have grown a strong foundation to perform original research and I think the Department of Computer Science at University of California, Davis is one of those places where I can reach my full potential. Also, coming from a land which is rich with culture of music, literature and arts, I believe I will uniquely contribute towards the diversity of the University of California, Davis .